I.I. Introduction
The phenomenon of fluidisation can best be visualised in terms of
a simple experiment in which a bed of solid particles is supported on
a horizontal gauze in a vertical tube. Gas or liquid is then forced to
flow upwards through the gauze, and so through the particle bed.
This flow causes a pressure drop across the bed, and when this
pressure drop is sufficient to support the weight of the particles the
bed is said to be incipiently fluidised. Any further increase in flow
causes the bed to expand to accommodate the increase. The fluidised
bed thus formed has many of the properties of a liquid; its upper
surface remains horizontal when the containing apparatus is tilted,
and it hardly impedes the movement of objects floated on the surface.
When the flow of gas or liquid through the bed is increased still
further, to the point at which the flow velocity becomes greater than
the free-falling velocity of the particles, then, clearly, the particles
are carried out of the apparatus.

1.2. The uses of fluidised systems
A fluidised system has a number of highly useful properties, the
more important being concerned with temperature control and heat
transfer, continuity of operation, and catalytic reactions.

Temperature control and heat transfer
The same temperature is quickly established throughout a
fluidised system because the general agitation of the particles dis-
perses local regions of hot or cold. A fluidised bed is therefore very
suitable for catalytic reactions requiring close temperature control.
There is also a high rate of heat transfer to a solid object placed in the
bed, so that it is a very convenient heat transfer medium; for this
reason a gas-fluidised bed can be used as a constant temperature
bath in which to immerse a reaction vessel that has to be at a high
temperature (Adams, Gernand and Kimberlin, 1954).

Continuity of operation
A fluidised system enables solid particles to be handled essentially
as a liquid, and this can be a very considerable asset in the design of
a continuous process. The addition and withdrawal of solid particles
from the process equipment is also facilitated.

Catalytic reactions
Fluidisation is an excellent way of bringing a gas into contact with
a solid, and therefore catalytic reactions are often well suited to the
technique. Fluidised beds first became of major importance through
the development of a fluidised process for cracking heavy hydro-
carbons into petroleum spirit (Murphree, Brown, Fischer, Gohr
and Sweeney, 1943).
The applications of fluidisation fall into two broad categories
(i) chemical reactions and catalysis, and (ii) physical and mechanica
processes. The drying of solid particles (Jobes, 1954) is an example
of (ii). Apart from fluid catalytic cracking, the chemical uses of
fluidisation have also included the Fischer-Tropsch process (Hal
and Crumley, 1952), the roasting of pyrites (Thompson and
MacAskill, 1955), and the reduction and fluorination of uranium
(Hawthorn, Shortis and Lloyd, 1960). This brief list of application
is only intended to be illustrative; it is by no means exhaustive
Zenz and Othmer (1960) describe some 20 uses of fluidisation, and
they refer to 50 more.

The disadvantages of fluidised systems
A fluidised bed is not suitable for all fluid-solids processes, and
considerable difficulties have arisen in the past when some of its
disadvantages have not been clearly recognised, for instance:
(i) The quick equilibration of temperature in a fluidised system
means that it is unsuitable for a reaction which is best carried out in
a reactor giving a temperature gradient along the reaction path.
(ii) The ease with which particles can be fluidised can var
enormously, and thus a fluidised process is usually precluded fo
particles which do not flow freely or which agglomerate (e.g. waxes)
(iii) The bubbles of gas characteristic of most gas-solids bed
can cause both chemical and mechanical difficulties. For instance

in a gas-solids reaction, it is possible for some of the gas in the
bubbles to by-pass the particles altogether, and so the overall
efficiency of contact is lowered. The bubbles can also cause
mechanical buffeting sufficient to cause breakage when, for
example, weak fabric or paper is dried in a hot fluidised bed.

1.3. Definitions

Typical results for a gas-fluidised bed of particles are shown in
fig. I; the pressure drop across the bed, and its height, are plotted
as functions of the superficial gas velocity. There is marked
hysteresis, so that for slowly increasing flow the curves A are
generated, while the curves D are for slowly decreasing flow; the
amount of hysteresis depends upon the degree of consolidation of
the original bed. At point B, the overall pressure drop is slightly
more than enough to support the weight of the particles, owing to
the wedging action within the bed. A slight increase in flow above
point B frees the particles, the pressure drop becomes just enough
to support their weight, and consequently point C is usually defined
as the point of incipient fluidisation, the superficial gas velocity being
U. and the voidage fraction, €0 If the flow rate is now slowly
decreased from point C, the particles are more loosely packed, and
consequently the bed height is greater and the pressure drop smaller,
as shown by curves D. By starting with a bed of loosely packed
particles (one that has just been fluidised) it is possible to get the
curves for increasing flow-rate to coincide with the curves for
decreasing flow-rate; the hysteresis is then eliminated.
Below incipient fluidisation, results similar to those in fig. I are
obtained for liquid-fluidised beds.

(b) Aggregative fluidisation
For a gas-fluidised bed in which the gas velocity is greater than
Uo, some of the gas may pass through the bed as bubbles, and these
an be seen to burst when they reach the top surface of the bed as
hown in Plate I. This is commonly known as aggregative fluidisation,
nd usually occurs when solids are fluidised by gases. The bubbles
gitate the bed, and consequently its height fluctuates as indicated
n region E of fig. I.

